When did you, when and where did you go back to
school? Okay, I came back in April 46, discharged
at Camp Atterbury, 10
miles from Franklin, Indiana, where my mother and
father had lived at one time, and I was related to
about a third of the county. I came back and decided
to go back and finish my dissertation on G.I. Bill.
This was the It paid my expenses, and what was it,
$80 or $90 a month, and all my dissertation costs,
et cetera, et cetera. And
you don't get much leave while war is going on, so I
had almost three months of leave to accumulate and
got a certain amount of cash. I'd finished my
dissertation. It worked out fine.
But when I finished it, I was the second PhD in
Chicago from
about 1942 to finish. Everybody had gone in. So I
had a doctoral thing. you know, your doctoral
committee normally. I had my
sitting in my, everybody wanted to sit in on a
doctoral exam. Nobody had been in one except Al
Summitt who had preceded me, who's been president
of Southern Illinois later. Here are the people
who, I made a list once of who was on my
dissertation. board and sat and why they passed me
I'll never know. Leonard White, Herman
Pritchett, Walter Johnson, head of the history
department, Morton Grodson, then head of
political science, Don Price, Albert Lepofsky,
head of the Finance Officers Association, James
Mitchell, later civil service commissioner,
Jerome Kerwin, political theory, Charles
Harden, Avery Leiserson, Hans Morgenthau,
Lindsay Wright, and Alfred Cobbett. Oh, my. That
was a who's who. Oh, dear. And I'd been away from
school for five years. So I always think of one.
Cobbett asked me, I'd lived in France, would I care
to comment on the experience of the French
government after the war? I thought, oh, God. I
said, no, I wouldn't. And I got away with it. They
passed me, I think, by the... I could answer
questions on the dissertation all right, but
nobody read it. This crowd, they didn't have a clue
about the history of the U.S. Civil Service.
Leonard White did, but...
So... At the first job, where was it? My first job, I
interviewed at Princeton, Purdue,
Northwestern, And everybody was looking for
people, so there was a job. And I was offered most at
Purdue, but I went to Northwestern. What was the
first, that beginning size? 3,300. And what did
that? It wasn't bad. That seemed like a pretty good
sum, didn't it? Yeah. And this is as an instructor.
They didn't do assistant professors yet. That
took another 5, 10 years before a PhD could start as
assistant professor.
So I was made assistant professor two years later.
Then I decided I wanted to get a bit of experience in
the civil service. So I took the exam for
management analyst and passed it. And 51 and 2, I
spent as a GS-12 management analyst in the Office
of the Comptroller of the Army as a civil servant.
In Washington? In Washington. Doing studies of
the supply operations in the military. And
became, at the end, a section chief in the that when
Ed Litchfield, who was General Secretary of
Political Science, who had been and was, or had
just come back from being head of the Civil
Administration Division of German Military
Government under General Clay. And Litchfield
had just been appointed Dean of the new School of
Business and Public Administration at Cornell.
And
I had done a program for Litchfield while I was at
Northwestern. I had the first group of Germans
into the United States for training in democracy.
We had about a dozen state and local government
officials. And I set up a program with the
help of the public administration,
clearinghouse people, Louis Brownlow and
Herbert Emmerich, and some of the Chicago
faculty. We had the program beginning lecture
discussion part at the University of Chicago. And
then we sent them out in the field. Three of them,
they'd heard about that the Indian had been so
badly treated. So I sent them up to the Cherokee
Reservation in northern Wisconsin to see this
terrible treatment they were getting. And so one
of the greatest help to me was T.V. Smith. who had
worked with Germans. And he clued me in on a, and I
have a small volume that he did, which has never
been published, I don't know why not, on kind of
background. He said the problem that the Germans
have to face is if
you are right, How can you compromise? This is the
problem in European politics for the most part.
They speak of the French as being very logical.
They're so goddamn logical they never can agree.
And they said they're perfectly right. The ethics
of compromise are a bit peculiar. So we faced that
head on. TV had a book, and they said you can in fact
do a great many things without coming up into
ethical problems if you will do so. So I got two or
three people in talking on that kind of problem.
public service, the public administration task,
then back to academics? Yes, I was on leave for a
semester at Northwestern, then back to
Northwestern, then to Washington, and then to
Cornell. I came to Cornell the fall of 52 and was
there for 18 years. Ed made me an offer of five-year
term appointment as associate professor, and
that looked fine to me. So I was making up lost time.
And
I got appointed full professor in 1958. Now, how
did you and A&M link up?
In 63,
I became national general secretary of Beta Theta
Pi. Our general secretary is a part-time
official. We have a full-time person in the
headquarters. We did it that way unusually. Most
of the attorneys tended to fall in the hands of the
full-time permanent secretary. Well, our chief
administrative officer is a private citizen,
part-time general secretary, and most of the work
is done by volunteers rather than by full-time
people. So I agreed to do that. I had the
interesting situation. My president was Dean
Malott, who was a Kansas Spatha. My dean was Bill
Carmichael, who had married Owen D. Young's
granddaughter, and Owen D. Young was a St.
Lawrence beta, and Philip Young's daughter. He'd
been dean of business in Columbia, and he was a
beta. So my dean was not a beta, but his daughter,
his wife. So I had my deans okay, and the presidents
okay to do this. I still taught my courses, but I got
some extra space and a secretary and so on. So I was
general secretary at Bethlehem DePauw for a term.
Well, in 64, fortunately,
when I became that, I had agreed to be general
secretary, other things, and pull out two terms,
other things being equal. Well, I got engaged to
Dorothy in 64 and I reported to the board, I'm
sorry, things are no longer equal.
So I have Dorothy and I have a 13 year old stepson.
And so I finish that and end my work with beta theta
pi for a while because As general secretary, I had
to sit in a board meeting being presided over by my
predecessor, who had been made president. And I
figured, and who's a very able man, but with whom,
very conservative, and I knew the fraternities
had to expand. And I was all the time, in effect,
trying to overturn his policies so I decided I will
not be around while my successor is Joe Ramota who
was dean of faculty at Saint Lawrence succeeded me
and So I stayed out of fraternity affairs for quite
a bit until we got a chapter here and I got involved
and I was their advisor for about six, seven years.
Well, that was running a large nonprofit
organization, the Volunteers, is also an
interesting experience.
And
so,
We got my stepson through high school. He'd been
moved enough. So we got him through Ithaca High
School, and he was admitted into Syracuse. And he
could have gotten in the College of Agriculture at
Cornell, but that didn't much interest him.
He didn't have quite good enough grades make the
College of Liberal Arts.
So, I decided eighteen winners, eighteen Ithaca
winners is enough. I was quite happy at Cornell. I
was getting a bit irked with the faculty who had, I
think in 67 or 68, brought up
This is military unrest in Vietnam. For about the
fourth time brought up the question, do we allow
the ROTC? And I thought, four times is enough of
that.
Cornell is heavily governed by its faculty, in
distinction to a lot of institutions. So I began to
look around. I had been out to Willamette to do a,
they were interested in founding a school of
business and public administration. And the
Chicago Beta was on their board of trustees and
knew my background in the Cornell. Would I come out
and do a study for them? Was this feasible? And I
talked to one of our Cornell professors who is now
Dean of Business at Oregon. And so I knew I could get
him. What are their plans? Well, they had no money
to expand and weren't interested in expanding. So
there wasn't going to be any. Portland was in no
shape to do anything. So Willamette,
being at the state capitol, was a natural for the PA
part of it. And it looked like they would have no
great competition in the business side. So I made a
recommendation. And of course, I was asked if I
wanted to be dean of that, which I declined.
They're too far away. And besides Willamette was a
teetotaling school and too many other. I didn't
want to live that kind of life anyway. And I was a
long way from Washington. So University of
Georgia
was interested in talking, and I interviewed for a
dean of the college at Georgia Tech and came close.
I was interviewed for residency of Colgate and
Miami University, Oxford, Ohio, and was told in
both places I was close. After that, things were
looking messy, so in the university world I
decided no more of this kind of look-see. So one of
the professors at Georgia
recommended me to the people looking here. So I got
a letter from Texas A&M. Who was the letter from?
Who was the real contact? The letter was from, oh,
this is from Hubert's, Hubert's office or
somewhere. And was it still Arts and Sciences, or
was it just Liberal Arts then? Liberal Arts, yeah,
as I remember. And his associate dean, I still see,
McCandless.
So I was invited down and brought Dorothy down with
me. And as I began to see things and to see the
colleges, most private schools and public
schools were having financial problems by 1970.
And A&M was not. And almost the weekend I came down
to visit Ruddy had his stroke and died.
So I am interviewed by Hubert. who is the dean of
both education and liberal arts, and I think I'm
about his last department head appointment. What
was your, as you think back about that interview,
describe the Hubert as an interviewer? Well, I
wasn't interviewed much by Hubert. I was
interviewed in the department. The department
had been formed in 68, out of history, as you know.
And
William,
well, he ought to remain nameless, had been there
for a year from the Foreign Service. Yeah, I can't
remember his name either. And I can give you the
name, but in light of what I'm going to say, it's
just as well we'll skip that. nice guy, Ph.D.
Princeton out of the Foreign Service. And
the problem was he didn't know anything about
academia.
Well, be that as it may, but my main interview was
with the faculty, and I remember my—I'm
And I decided, you know, one doesn't talk about
one's dissertation.
So I said, I'll open with a pronouncement, and then
if you don't like it, don't hire me. This is the time
when the behavioral and traditional are fighting
in the social sciences, and particularly in
political science. Cornell had been split over
it. Berkeley was split over it. I said, I just want
to comment on this. I said,
as to this kind of fight, I want to make it clear.
I've done a history than which you cannot be more
traditional. Now, I said, I've also just finished
with the sociologist Lloyd Warner the study of
American federal executives. which is the
largest questionnaire interview study
anybody's ever done. And with 1,300,000
pieces of data on punch cards and all the apparatus
that goes with it. Now I said, it was very
interesting to find that All of our propositions
for which we used the punch card data to
demonstrate, most of them came from the history.
Now I said, I'm quite convinced you need both sides
of this coin and I will raise hell with anybody who
wants to make a fight about it. And so with that
pronouncement, we had a very nice discussion and I
was hired. I wrote Hubert. I said their salary is
$1,000 or $2,000 too low, and he gave me another
$1,000. All right, now this would be the last
salary question. What was the beginning?
$29,000. $29,000. Yeah.
When you came to visit, you met with Hubert and the
search committee. Anyone else? I'm trying to
remember.
Mr. Rudder was already... He's out of it. All
right. I think I had a visit with... Byers as the
chief academic officer?
I don't think anybody... I visited anybody up
there at that time. I think they were relying
enough chaos in the operational on with
Rudder's... Rudder's just died. Mm-hmm. And
enough chaos that nobody, I think it's left to
Hubert. What was your, for you and your wife, what
were your impressions of A&M and of this
community? Well, Dorothy thought, oh, God. She's
from the east. And while she and I are first cousins
once removed, she knows Indiana and all. brought
up in Miami, Florida, which is East Coast Jewish,
if anything. As she said, she walked along and
people said hello to her. Her view of this howdy
business was an invasion of privacy.
So she wasn't so sure, but she was willing to do it. I
came down a second time and took my life in my hands,
and I bought, she hadn't seen it, the house across
the street.
I said, we're interested in old houses. They began
to show me 30s and 40s and 50s. I said, haven't you
got anything 19th century? Well, she said, there
is one, but it might be on the market. The Wilson
House, it's in an estate, it's about to be settled,
and... I went in it, and the price was $20,000. I
could have knocked down another five, I think, but
I was so astonished because such things in Ithaca,
they were already being snapped up. Texas is, you
know, housing-wise, ten years behind. And
$20,000, I thought, I can't believe it. This is
intact. painted canvas walls, crystal
chandeliers, lovely woodwork. It needs a little
foundation work. It's pier and beamed, but
everything's there, and 20,000, I can't believe
it. So I'm in it 20 minutes and said, I'll take it.
And I took my, as they say, my life in my hands
because Dorothy liked it. But I'd bought it
without her. Now, this is late spring 1970. This is
late spring 1970. And so you all arrived when?
Okay, part of my deal with Hubert was that there was
no money for
travel transportation down. So I got the...
salary, half salary, all of my July salary. I
didn't have to report till early August, but I got
paid for July. And so we arrived in the early
August. Did anyone give you any guidelines as to
what they expected?
Next to none. What dreams did anyone have for the
department from any sort? Well, my predecessor
had set out deliberately to make it a behavioral
department. That's the interesting thing is he
was a PhD in international relations from
Princeton with no background whatever in
numerical quantitative stuff. a most unlikely
candidate. He had set out to... He'd
gotten in the budget money for a distinguished
professor. And
he then was trying to make life difficult for Gene
Benton. I was going to be six weeks late getting
there, so I designated the senior professor as
acting head without consulting anybody else. I
didn't think I needed to. And Gene Benton was the
acting head, and I get a call from my
predecessor desperately, a phone call in Ithaca,
what do I mean by making Benton acting head? He's
going to ruin me. And I find out that he's been
trying to get rid of Benton. He deprived me of an
office, of a telephone, and making life as
difficult as possible. He said, Benton's going to
crucify me. I said, if he does, give me a ring and we
will take care of that problem. But meanwhile,
Benton is staying as acting kid. And there was no
problem. Gene was too nice a guy. So
I had made my position clear. No, it was very funny.
I really had no directions particularly at all and
no pressures anywhere. Did you have some goals
when you got here? Well, I began to figure some out
fairly quickly.
This is a brand new department. One thing that
interests me is that you don't often get a blank
page on which to write in academia. I had been lucky
at Cornell in on the founding, essentially. I was
there two years after the school opened. Well, two
years after the first graduating class, and it was
still being formed. and then here. And so
by the end of the summer, David Maxwell is coming on
as Hubert's replacement. Dean of Liberal Arts.
Yeah.
Maxwell is interested in some forward planning.
But I have no particular directions from Maxwell.
I'm as old as he is, and he figures, I think, that
I've got some notions, maybe. I said, look, Dean, I
want about six months to get familiar with the
school. I said, this is not unlike Cornell. In
fact, it was exactly the same size as Cornell when
we came here. 14,000.
And a land grant institution. I was well aware of
that. Except the College of Liberal Arts of
Cornell was always, it was the center of the
university's strength. Well, it never had been
here. So,
first thing I did, I have about 30,000 in for a full
professor in the budget that hasn't been filled.
I've come, but I'm in the head slot. And I said, Dean
Maxwell, look, I'm in a funny situation here.
My predecessor had designed a PhD program. He had
put it through the winter of 69 to Huber.
Except one of the last things Huber did before he
left was disapprove it. Meanwhile, my
predecessor has offered and they've accepted six
assistantships to prospective PhD students.
They're here, and no PhD.
And what's more, no prospects of one. What
possessed my predecessor to think he could get
one, he only had Benton, Rowe, and himself as
possible members of a graduate faculty. And to do a
PhD on that is
So I said, Dean, I want to start building this from
young people. I don't want to bring in on top of
them. I don't want to discourage them. With young
people, I said, my predecessor has done one thing
well. He has brought four or five young assistant
professors here who are good. Gary Holder is one,
Dixon, Bob Bernstein. I don't know whether any of
these, you know Holder, of course. A fellow who
was, when I was coming, decided he better maybe, he
wasn't so sure he went, but he was good enough that
Rice took him. And another one went to
maybe LSU.